#cogito

# Ouverture: Living in a Topsy-Turvy World

## From Catastrophe to Apocalypse

Today, multiple catastrophes compete for primacy, not just quantitatively, also to be the ***quilting point*** which totalizes all others.

* Anti-vaccine, the struggle against vaccination condenses other struggles.
    * Outcome of ideological mystification; the struggle against vaccination is a displaced-mystified form of class struggle against those in power.

Catastrophe, 'naked apocalypse':
* Apocalypse is a disclosure/revelation of knowledge, hidden truth we are blind to in our ordinary lives.
* Every catastrophic event places us face to face with an oppressed truth.
* **'Naked apocalypse'**: mere downfall which does not represent the opening of new, positive state of affairs.
    * 'What if truth is something that is constructed afterwards, as an attempt to make sense of the catastrophe?'
* End of the end: today, we passed from catastrophe to apocalypse and then back to catastrophe.
    * The end of history drags on and even brings its own enjoyment.
* Catastrophe, also when reality remains as it is and just the symbolic fiction that sustains our approach to reality dissolves.
    * Sexuality; the gap between bodily reality and universe of fantasies is there from the very beginning.
    * Catastrophe is something that always-already happened, our normality is by definition post-apocalyptic (fossils).

New type of conflict:
* Belarus forcing Ryanair plane to land for dissident.
* Collision of state sovereignty and the interest of larger communities.

Most critiques and protests against global capitalism effectively function as its ideological supplement and do not question its basic premises.

## An Unexpected Lustgewinn

Why do we enjoy oppression itself?
* Power asserts its hold by bribing, what we get in exchange for our renunciations is a perverted pleasure in renunciation itself, gain in loss itself.
    * Enjoyment is always surplus, excess.
* Marx, surplus-value, analysis of commodities.
* Freud,** Lustgewinn**--- additional pleasure provided by the formal detours in the subject's effort to attain pleasure.
    * Hysteria: renunciation of pleasure → pleasure in renunciation.
    * **Capitalist logic**: modern capitalism began with counting the pleasure and this counting immediately reverts to the pleasure of counting.
* Gain occurs at a "performative" level, generated by the performance of working towards a goal.

Is there a way out of the vicious cycle of pleasure and pain?
* **Subjective destitution**; acquiring distance from wealth of "inner person", while remaining a subject.
    * Pure subject

## 2 + a

The present, objet a/surplus-enjoyment is the operator of topsy-turviness.
* Permissiveness; suffocation of desire when its object is freely available, surplus-enjoyment is missing.
* Topsy-turviness of human history only appears as such after the "end of history" in 1990.

Spirit is a virus parasitizing on the human animal.

## "Good luck, Mr Hegel!"

The role of an intellectual today is to envisage the dangerous potentials of the emerging new order.
* Kicking an already-dead system in the head is useless (alt-right, PC pseudo-leftist), this is why moderate conservatives are often the only reasonable partners of what remains of the radical Left.

Zizek's quotations; what if the quoted author is himself inconsistent, caught in historical antagonisms, so that the real violence is a reading which obfuscate these antagonisms?
* Quoting to justify ideological and political measures; truth of Soviet Leninism.
    * Lenin as ultimate reference, how the Catholic Church referred to the Bible.
    * Stalinist quotation.
* Materialist engaged reading: Benjamin, quotation as a form of struggle with the text as well as with the writer's own predicament.
    * Materialist quotation is internal to the quoted original through its very externality to it.

***"safe space"***:
* "Unsafe" amounts to something that threatens the self-declared victim's views and self-perception.
* Trigger warnings, "substantial framing, content advisory", these were measures taken in Soviet Union in 1970s, early 1900s' Catholic children could not read the Bible alone, without an adult to provide the "substantial framing and content advisory".
* Imposing the condition of "substantial framing" on showing a film is in itself a racist act: treats viewers in an extremely patronizing way, as naive creatures who have to be protected from the direct impact of the text.
    * Also protects whites in their racism; assuring them that their privileges are safe even in an officially non-racist culture.
* Proposed strategy of "substantial framing" does not work because proper insults which affect the victim are impervious to negation; this is why the N-word is prohibited and cannot be used.
* Problematic concept of "academia as safe space": we should fight to render the world OUTSIDE the academia safe for all, and academia should be the space where we openly confront all racist and sexist horrors.

# 1 Where is the Rift? Marx, Capitalism and Ecology

Ecology, question of the ontological status of nature;

* Dialectical materialism allows to think of humanity as part of nature.
* Western Marxism, Lukacs, nature is a historical category.

Pandemic, global warming, compels us not to abandon Hegel but to return from Marx to Hegel after passing through Marx's critique of political economy.

Hegel tells the story of modern society through two breaks; break in religion and philosophy, and the French Revolution.

* Ignores capitalism and industrial revolution.
* Capitalism again and again emerges as the only alternative, only way to move forward.
    * Today, capitalism is much more revolutionary than the traditional Left (welfare state).
    * Many leftists ignore the passage from neoliberal capitalism to **"corporate neo-feudalism"**.

## Neoconservative Communism

"General intellect" (social knowledge and cooperation) leads not to the self-dissolution of capitalism but the gradual transformation of the profit generated by the exploitation of labor into rent appropriated by the privatization of the "general intellect" and other commons.
* Microsoft imposed itself as universal standard, direct embodiment of the "general intellect".
* Users are in the position of serfs paying rent to the owner of a common as our feudal master.
* Public space is disappearing.

Finance during COVID times, reversal of Keynesian procedure: the financial measures aimed to invest money in the financial sphere, not to help "real" economy, while making sure that most of this money will NOT flow into the "real" economy.

Privatization of commons undermines the ethical substance within each culture, pushing us back into barbarism.

China:
* Opening of new stock exchange in Beijing dedicated to the promotion of small firms as a move against neo-feudal corporatism.
    * Irony: a strong Communist regime is needed to keep capitalism alive against the threat of neo-feudal corporatist post-capitalism.
* Emphasizing the key role of the domain of symbolic fictions is important.
    * **Reality of fictions**, if we destroy fictions on which our social interactions are based, our social reality itself begins to fall apart.
* Neoconservativism: China accused Hong Kong demonstrators of "exporting revolution to the world".
    * Solidarity of those in power against the rebellious populace.
* Imposing a new common ethical substance;
    * **Tension between content and form**: the establishment of stable values that hold a society together is enforced in the form of mobilization which is experienced as a kind of emergency state imposed by the state apparatus.

Carlo Ginzburg: ***shame*** for one's country may be the true mark of belonging to it.

Kant: ***public vs private use of reason***;
* Private: "that which one may make of it in a particular civil post/office which is entrusted to him"	
    * Communal-institutional order of one's particular identification.
* Public: "the use of which a person makes of it as a scholar before the reading public".
    * Trans-national universality of the exercise of one's Reason.

Kant's formula of Enlightenment: "Think freely, state your thoughts publicly, and ***obey!***"
* Vaccine doubters should debate, publish doubts, but obey regulations once the public authority imposes them.
* Without practical consensus, we will drift into a society composed of tribal factions.
* Without the space for the public use of reason, the state itself becomes just another instance of the private use of reason.
    * Lenin, organ embodying the public use of reason, CCC.

T.S. Eliot: moments when the only way to keep a religion alive is to perform a sectarian split from its main corpse.
* Lenin, "New Economic Policy" after 1922, retreat in a revolutionary process without opportunistically betraying one's fidelity to the Cause.
    * Beckettian, "try again. Fail again. Fail better."
    * Descending back to the starting point

Capitalism itself as socialist New Economic Policy, as a passage from feudalism to socialism.
* Capitalist modernity is in itself already socialist--- abolishment of direct personal relations of servitude and domination, assertion of principles of personal freedom and human rights.
* Capitalism is a **compromise formation**: direct relations of domination → relation of domination between commodities.
* Stalinism, abolishing capitalism leads to {==abolishing freedom==}{>>From Marx and on,  equality and not freedom is the ground of the struggle. Logic of politics, primacy of equality.<<}, personal domination returns in direct and brutal way.
* True alternative is "what kind of post-capitalism? Corporate neo-feudalism or socialism".


What is to be done?
* Lacan: 'only the one whose desire is waning asks what is to be done'.
* Lenin's book gives clear answer.
* Today's post-Marxists ponder endlessly on what to do, who might be the agent of radical change, desperate doubt and search shows waning of their desire to really embark on a radical change.
    * They enjoy the endless self-critical pondering which will not lead to any clear result.
* Society vs state: something like the state is needed to provide well-functioning background of self-organized local communities.
    * The network cannot grow 'from below' since it{== must always-already be here==}{>>Similar to how ethicality, the State, is the ground for the triads (background of family and civil society)<<} for communities to survive.
    * However alienated, the global interest has to exist in a "reified" institutional form to control the excesses of local communities, as well as to coordinate their interaction.
    * Limit of anarchism; anarchism rests on a false presupposition that "people" want to think for themselves if given the opportunity.

LGBT+ and MeToo threaten to undermine the most elementary patriarchal order that emerged before the rise of class society itself, with the Neolithic.
* In the entire history of humanity, only two truly radical breaks: Neolithic and capitalist industrial revolution.
* Although late capitalism is still a class society, it undermines the patriarchal order which arose back in pre-class societies.
* We should resist **"disaster patriarchy"**

## Hegel in the Critique of Political Economy

Two relevant readings of Hegel:

\1. Lukacs, *History and Class Consciousness*: Hegel's substance-becoming-subject is a mystified idealist version of the historical-materialist notion of the proletariat as the subject of history which re-appropriates its alienated substance in the act of revolution.

\2. "Logic of capital": Hegel's dialectics is a mystified idealist version of the logic of capital's self-reproduction.
* Marx realized that the domain of the circulation of Capital behaves in a Hegelian way.

***Commodity fetishism:*** it appears as if the concrete content of a commodity is an expression of its abstract universality (use value, exchange value)--- the abstract Universal, the Value, appears as a real Substance which successively incarnates itself in a series of concrete objects.
* The root of philosophical speculative idealism are in the social reality of the world of commodities; this world behaves "idealistically".

Three levels in a dialectical process of inversions which produce a fetishistic effect:
* 1. Common-sense nominalist notion of Roman law and German law as the two kinds of law.
* **2. Fetishistic inversion:** The Law, this abstraction, realizes itself in Roman law and German law.
* **3. The historical real:** the immanent "contradiction" inscribed into the universal notion of the law, which pushes the movement from one to another particular form.

**Fetishization is necessarily redoubled**: capitalist subject does not live directly in magic world of fetishes, he considers himself utilitarian rationalist who knows very well that money is paper.
* **Fetishistic disavowal**: fetishism in social reality, how he acts and not in how he thinks.
* Today, freedom:
    * Individuals are interpellated as free agents responsible for our own fate.
        * Ideology of free choice, freedom of choice appears as the basic form of freedom.
        * Social control and domination no longer appear as infringing on the subject's freedom, it appears as the very self-experience of individuals as free.
        * "Free choice" is a burden that deprives us of the true choice of change.
        * Late capitalism's "spontaneous" ideology endeavors to obliterate the class division itself, the differences among us is merely quantitative and everybody is an entrepreneur.
    * Freedom of choice is accompanied by its opposite, the subject who grounds the authority of his speech on his status as a victim of circumstances beyond his control.
        * **Narcissistic perspective**: every encounter with the Other appears as a potential threat to the subject's precarious imaginary balance.
        * Supplement of the liberal free subject: the self-centered assertion of the psychological subject paradoxically overlaps with the perception of oneself as a victim of circumstances.
    * What lurks behind the tension between initiative and luck is the obscure domain of **Fate**, which appears today as the mysterious global circulation of Capital full of theological subtleties.

Is Hegel's dialectics the mystified expression of the logic of Capital or the model for the revolutionary process of emancipation?
* Logic of capital argument doesn't go all the way:
    * Mystification immanent to the circulation of capital, 'objectively-social' fantasy.
    * Hegelian fantasy of capital's self-generating reproduction obliterates workers' exploitation, how the circle of capital's self-reproduction draws its energy from the ex-timate source of value.
        * Intermediary level of** 'objective fantasy'**.

## Actual Life versus Substanceless Subjectivity

The problem is how to think of the Hegelian circulation of capital and its de-centered cause (labor force) together, how to think of the causality of a productive subject external to the circulation of capital without resorting to Aristotelian positivity of workers' productive potentials.
* Marx starts from this positivity and rejects the logic of dialectical process which progresses "from nothing through nothing to nothing".
* Marx, "actual life", positive process external to the movement of capital as its substantial presupposition.
    * The "life" of capital parasitizes on actual life.
* BUT the true fetish is the notion of direct positive life preceding alienation, an organic life whose balance was destroyed by capitalist alienation.

    * Disavows the antagonisms that traverse the very heart of actual life.


Hegelian subject:
* "Pathological" inversion of substance out of which it arises; what is at the beginning a subordinated element of substance self-posits itself and retroactively posits its substantial presupposition, establishing itself as universal.
* Subject returns-to-itself from externality but this return produces what it returns to, subject emerges THROUGH alienation.

Marx, insofar as capital is a Subject that arises out of the substance of social life, the retroactive integration of substance fails. This implies that there must be a subjectivity in life-substance itself as opposed to the subjectivity of capital.
* Life of capital is blindly repetitive, passage from necessity into freedom doesn't work here; capital is not free, true potential of freedom must reside in life substance external to capital.
* Two modes of subjectivity:
    * 1. Spectral subjectivity of capital
    * 2. Pure proletarian subjectivity, what remains when all substantial content is appropriated by Capital.
* **True subject is on the side of substantial Life**, the opposition between Life and Capital implies that Life is in itself already antagonistic, {==split==}{>>From the split between capital and Life (subject and substance), to the split within substantial Life itself<<} between substantial Life and the **void of pure subjectivity**.

Hidden identity of poles: the logic of capital is in itself (potentially) the logic of emancipation.
* In contrast to productive appropriation, speculation** lets its Other be**, and doesn't intervene in it.


Symbolic fictions and reality:
* Hegelian 'letting-it-be' has the **form of knowledge**, scientific knowledge which doesn't mess with its object but merely observes its self-movement.
    * Scientific knowledge observes the interaction between in-itself and our dictions, where fictions are immanent to in-itself.
    * Today's experimental science has the opposite stance: active intervention in the object and its technological manipulation, creation of new objects, which simultaneously aims at how this object is in itself, independent of our interaction with it.
* Power of Understanding, it is the power of "separate freedom" acquired by an objet itself when it is torn out of its living context and obtains separate existence of its own.
* Fictions emerge out of the socio-symbolic interaction of workers which presupposes the "big Other".

Saito:
* Human labor as the process of metabolism between humanity as part of nature and its natural environs.
* Wider context of natural processes cannot be reduced to any self-mediation; externality of nature is irreducible.
* {==Rift in capitalist modernity==}{>>Still a fetishistic image of the “before” capitalism, with harmonious ties between human labor and nature.<<}; historical dissolution of the original unity between humans and the earth.
    * Capitalist labor's goal is to expand reproduction of capital itself irrespective of the damage done to the environment.

## Eco-proletarians and the Limits of Valorization

Capitalism, exploitation takes place in the form of ***valorization***, reduction of the labor force to a commodity.
* Valorized vs non-valorized work (women's housework).


# 3 Surplus-Enjoyment, Or, Why We Enjoy our Oppression

## Vikings, Solaris, Katla: The Big Other and its Vicissitudes

*Vikings*:
* Ragnar's death: the only thing that can mobilize the Vikings to take revenge is his horrible death at the hands of the enemy.
* Ragnar and Ecbert's encounter; we can have polite revolutionaries.
    * Both beyond the pleasure and reality principle.
    * The form of their interaction is irreducible to the content of revenge etc.; there is more truth in the polite mask than in the egoist content beneath it.
        * **Big Other as virtual entity**: its truth is its form itself.

**"There is no big Other":** it is inconsistent/incomplete, perforated by gaps which are filled with a ***fantasmatic apparition*** of the big Other as a real Thing in the guise of the ***Id-machine***, mechanism that directly materializes our unacknowledged fantasies. 
*Solaris*:
* Harey:
    * Harey acquires the status of the Real that forever insists and returns to its place, she cannot ever be erased, she is "undead", in the space between two deaths.
    * She exists only as the Other's dream, **suicide as ultimate ethical act**.
    * Subversive edge of Weiningerian denigration of woman as mere "symptom" of man (as embodiment of fantasy); may be more subversive than false direct assertion of feminine autonomy.
        * "I do not exist in myself, I am merely the Other's fantasy embodied."
    * Two suicides, the second is heroic act of self-erasure, properly **ethical act**.
        * Second Harey is Subject, deprived of her substantial identity.
* Planet:
    * **Psychotic short-circuit**: the planet imposes on us the answer before we even raise the question. It materializes my ultimate fantasmatic objectal supplement that I would never be ready to accept in reality, although my entire psychic life turns around it.
* Jacques-Alain Miller, **la femme a postiche**: the woman who takes refuge from the void in the heart of her subjectivity, from the "not-having-it" which marks her being, in the phony certitude of "having it".
    * "Having it", having a child. Lacan: ultimate antagonism between Woman and Mother: the mother definitely does exist.
    * **Disavowal of her lack** (vs flaunting lack, hysterical composite of semblances) serves as protective shield and support to patriarchal male identity.
        * The more the woman is a firm, self-enclosed Substance, the more she supports male identity.
* The structure of woman as symptom of man can be operative insofar as the man is confronted with his **Other Thing**, Id-machine.
    * Planet is the "Thing which thinks", impenetrable Other: returns us our most innermost disavowed fantasies, but the "Que vuoi?" beneath this act remains impenetrable.

Reality of my partner and my fantasy of him/her:
* Each of us IS also what others think/dream he/she is: distinction is immanent to my partner himself.
* The gap between me and my symbolic identity is not external to me--- I am **symbolically castrated**.
* Authentic position; at the point of assuming non-existence, emerges the pure subject deprived of its substance.

Materialism vs subjective idealism (things exist only insofar as they are known or perceived by a mind), third term: things that exist insofar as they are NOT known.
* Freud: father is alive only because it is not aware of being dead.
* Lacan: the dreamer (subject) knows that the father is dead, and, paradoxically, in this way keeps him alive by not telling him that he is dead.
    * Entire strategy at protecting the other from knowledge, protection goes up to self-**sacrifice**: one sacrifices oneself to prevent the Other from knowing.
* **Symptom**; a reality which subsists only insofar as something remains unsaid.
    * Real effect of interpretation, it can dissolve the symptom.
    * Reality thwarts the symbolic space from within, making it incomplete--- the limit that separates the real from the symbolic is **simultaneously external and internal to the symbolic**.

How does a subject emerge from the structure (the Other)?
* Structure is non-All.
* Subject's existence is correlated to being-thought (unlike a stone), but **being-thought incompletely**. I am the lack in Other's thought, a lack which is immanent to the thought.
* There is a subject insofar as the Other doesn't know it, subject is inscribed into the Other through **S1, the master-signifier** which reflexively marks in it the lack of a signifier.
* Subject is the self-awareness of the mask itself in its distance towards the real person.
* Intersubjectivity, minimal number is three:
    * Mutual "What do others think of me?" → "What does the big Other think of me and him?"

Id-machine is more than the big-Other:
* Singularity, Elon Musk, is there a dimension beyond the grasp of a wired brain?
    * Ranciere; "paradigm of the dreaming cogito", Lacan: "dreaming cogito" as hidden obverse of the rational self-transparent cogito.
* Neuralink: big Other is no longer enigmatic Thing outside us, we are directly IN the Thing, we float in it, lose distance that separates us from external reality.
* **Id-machine is not an exception:** the big Other is in itself failed, in one form or another it always engenders the Id-machine as its supplement.
    * Id-machine as defense-pathology, preventing full regression into psychosis.
* Similar to** symbolic Law and superego**: superego is also a pathological formation which prevents the dissolution of the Law.

## Birth of the Superego Out of the Breakage of the Law

Freud, unconscious sense of guilt: "normal man is not only more immoral than he believes but also far more moral than he knows."
* Hidden link between Superego and Id: not only is the unbearable pressure of the Superego sustained by the energy from the Id, we can also be more moral than we know.
* Unconscious morality includes ethical miracles.
    * *Antigone*, irrepressible commandment, one does it simply because one cannot not do it.
* Lacan: Freudian unconscious is ethical, Kant's moral Law is desire at its purest.

How does ***a-sexual social space*** come to distinguish itself from the domain of libidinally cathexed interactions?
\1. Death-drive accounts for dreams and acts which generate no pleasure but only pain.
\2. Social groups bring individuals to forsake their "rational" behavior and surrender to self-destructive violence.
\3. Operator of the a-sexualization of social space is superego.
* Lacan: **Jouissance --- superego**: to enjoy something we do as a kind of weird ethical duty.
    * (I) Ideal ego: idealized self-image
    * (S) Ego ideal: big Other
    * (R) Superego: big Other in its revengeful, sadistic aspect
        * Anti-ethical agency, stigmatization of our ethical betrayal.
* Freud, crowd pathology: short-circuit of the I and a; lacked the notion of the Symbolic, the normal-normative big Other.
    * There is no space in Ego-Superego-Id for the barred subject ($), which equal to the Cartesian cogito.
* Balibar: Freud's superego is pathological supplement which necessarily accompanies law since public law exists ONLY as internalized by subjects.
* Freud provides the politics of psychoanalysis, tensions are part of interpersonal politics.
* Lacan: big Other exists only if it is "externalized" by the subjects--- the "internalization" of the Law is effectively externalization, its (presup)position as a non-psychic symbolic space.
    * Subject is constitutively divided; psychic intimacy exists only if there is a space alienated from the subject to which it relates.
        * **Psychosis**, this alienation is suspended.
        * All the wealth of the individual's "inner life" is a content which just fills in the void of the pure subject--- the ego is the "stuff of the I".

Competitive fathers; permissiveness, competitive individualism etc.
* Classes continue to exist "**in themselves**" but not "**for themselves**," I see others from my class more as competitors then as members of same group with solitary interests.
* Extreme dissatisfaction assumes the form of chaotic revolts (OccupyWallStreet, gilets jaunes), unable to reach the "Leninist" stage of organized force with clear program.
* If there is no prohibition, desire itself vanishes, permissiveness kills desire.

So return to prohibition?
* Lacan, Miller: cynical attitude
    * **"Les non-dupes errent"**: if one does not act as if semblances are real, if one doesn't leave their efficacy undisturbed, things take a turn for the worse.
    * "One should protect the semblances of power for the good reason that one should be able to continue to enjoy."
* Only atheists have true faith: an ethical person acts even if he knows there is no god.
    * "Really believing" slides into fundamentalism; every authentic religion is aware that its authority is fetishist fake (I know, but I believe).
    * Self-referentially grounded on abyss: Kant's* Du kannst, denn du sollst! *Opposite of cynicism.

Authority has effect of castration on its bearer.
* Lacan: a psychotic is a king who thinks he is a king by his nature, without the processes of symbolic investiture.
* Miller's solution: I act AS IF symbolic titles are true in order not to disturb the social order or my ability to desire.
* Schuster, three modes to deal with the impossibility of acting with authority:
    * 1. To pretend as if there were no Other; postmodern friendly boss.
    * 2. To make oneself the mouthpiece of the Other; expert, medium through which the authority of impersonal science speaks.
    * 3. To identify the Other with one's charismatic persona; Trump, obscene charismatic leader who takes himself as a direct embodiment of the big Other.
        * Authority based on will and not on knowledge.
        * Return of the repressed of the expert knowledge which pretends to act without support in a figure of the master.
        * **Psychotic** form, lawless obscene Master; **"overpresent"**.
        * Neutral expert knowledge is transformed into its opposite, the "special" knowledge of conspiracy theories accessible only to the initiated.
* Hannah Arendt: parents should give up on authority.
    * But they can't, it is existentially false to wash one's hands in this way. False subjective stance.
* There is no way out of the problem of authority other than to assume it, with all the difficulties and discontents this entails.
    * Vs Miller: subject assumes authority sincerely, ready to sacrifice his/her life for it if needed.

Politics always involves the real of ***jouissance***.
* Lacan: emancipatory societies organize, kept together not only by semblances but by the Real of a Cause.
    * "Leninist" attempt to constitute a society

There is no exception: fundamentalism and PC rigorism--- either nothing is prohibited or everything is prohibited...

## From Authority to Permissiveness ... and Back

 Permissiveness: if god doesn't exist then there is nothing which is not prohibited; not-all is prohibited and this not-all exists in the guise of a universal permissiveness: everything is permitted, but every particular case is prohibited.

* Khmer Rouge: any religion is permitted but every particular existing religion is "absolutely forbidden" as reactionary.
* Hollywood: universal prohibition of sexuality → particular/selective affirmation
    * Imposes the particular affirmations of enjoyment.

PC "justice"; the censorship is worse because prohibitions are replaced by regulatory injunctions.
* **Pseudo-activity**, of how to make sure that nothing will really change by pretending to fight for the change all the time.
* One does not change things by prescribing measures without attacking the underlying causes of imbalance.
* **Fake egalitarianism:** ultimate dream of equity in enjoyment.
    * Sexuality: some people are much more attractive than others, sexuality is a domain of injustice and imbalance.

Pandemic regulations belong to the university discourse, not the Law.
* BUT the truth of the university discourse is a Master, secret agenda of those who impose anti-pandemic measures to assert social control and domination.
* **Permitted vs enjoined** (ordered):
    * Lacan: enjoyment turns into injunction once it is permitted. Psychoanalysis aims to turn enjoyment from enjoined to permitted (you can enjoy but you are not obliged to.)
* **Possibility and impossibility:**
    * Prohibition as illusion that enjoyment is possible, so that we can reach it through violating the prohibition.
    * Psychoanalysis: prohibition → immanent impossibility.
    * BUT ideology also presents as in itself impossible something that is prohibited because of economic class interests.
    * There are also inherent transgressions: one is obliged to violate some prohibitions.
    * There are also prohibitions that are themselves prohibited.
* **Surplus enjoyment:** we enjoy oppression itself, not just its violation.
    * PC enjoyment through the process of discovering how we unknowingly violated the PC rules.
        * Every concrete case of a possible sexual contact is rejected because, through their critical analysis, they discern in it traces of power relations.

False opposition: ***necessary repression*** (renouncing satisfaction of some desires as the condition of survival) ***vs surplus-repression*** done on behalf of exploitation and domination.
* Domination and exploitation operative in the way the necessary renunciations are libidinally cathexed.
* Surplus-oppression (prohibition without apparent reason) generates surplus-enjoyment.
* **Oppression vs repression:**
    * Oppression is directly experienced as such, but we are not aware of repression.
    * When I am oppressed, what is often repressed is the way I enjoy this oppression (with my complaints etc.).
* Miller: there is no enjoyment without oppression. The opposite of oppression is not freedom but **depression**, *loss of desire itself*.
* *Oppression-repression-depression:*
    * Oppression is opposite of depression.
    * Repression is primordial, designates immanent impossibility constitutive of human subjectivity.
        * Primordial repression is other face of "freedom": opens up the void, crack, which makes us free.

## No Freedom Without Impossibility

Communist society: there is no freedom without impossibility and this impossibility is the immanent "self-contradiction" of our desire.
* We should not confuse this impossibility with finitude.
* Not disalienation, Communism as compatible with horrors, with the "alienation" implied by the fact of language, the reflexive twists of human desire.
    * **Reflexivity**, love: you love somebody for love itself, not just due to reasons to love her/him/it.
        * **Actual infinity** constitutive of **death-drive.**
* Contrary to philosophers of finitude, Lacan's axiom is that one cannot escape immortality.
    * Immortality is an object that is a remainder/excess over finitude.
    * Multiplicity of immortalities:
        * Badiouian noble immortality of the deployment of an Event comes after a basic form of immortality which resides in the **Sadean fundamental fantasy**; fantasy of another body which can be tortured indefinitely.
        * Indestructible insistence, intuition of something indestructible in a truly radical Evil: **death drive**--- uncanny excess of life, "undead" urge.

Flisfeder: "theoretical anti-humanism" of 1960s vs today's post-humanism: 
* 1960s, death of the subject, today, death of the human.
* Today, return to matter and objectivity.
* Ultimate horizon of deconstruction (Foucault, Althusser) was discourse.
* Post-humanism; we are ignoring what we really are, the "blind", neuronal processes that go on in our brain.
    * Direct **materialist reductionism**: freedom and personal dignity is a "user's illusion".
* Anti-humanists started to talk like humanists, talking of the impossibility of reducing human self-experience to "objective" neuronal processes.
* Flisfeder argues for new universal humanism to ground emancipatory struggle needed today.
    * New transcendental reflection
    * Ready to sacrifice subject but not humanity.
* Zizek is ready to sacrifice the basic features of our being-human but not subject.
    * "Humanity" is at the same level as personality, "inner wealth" of our soul etc.--- it is a phenomenal form, mask, which fills in the void that "is" subject.
    * **Subject is self-relating negativity, death-drive;** what is in a human being more than human, immortality of death-drive.

Failure of being born: not the lack of being which is a failed being, it is our being itself which is our failure to achieve non-being.
* Being as such signals a failure, the only way to achieve perfection is to immerse oneself into the void of no-being.
* Reversal of radical negative act into a comic failure: "you wanted to self-destroy, you fail even in this..."
* Failed non-being: **master and slave**
    * History of freedom and recognition--- all culture--- can take place only with an **original compromise**: one side (future servant) "averts its eyes"--- is not ready to go to the end.

## Repression, Oppression, Depression

How to avoid depression without returning to repression?
* Postmodern multicultural society: racism and patriarchal oppression are left behind but economic exploitation remains.
* Envy and resentment are constitutive of human desire:
    * Desire is the other's desire
        * **Subjective** genitive: desire for the other, desire to be desired by the other
        * **Objective** genitive: desire for what the other desires
    * Jameson: envy and resentment will explode in Communism; *asceticism*, since it is not possible to impose equal enjoyment, what one can impose is the equally shared prohibition.
        * *hedonistic asceticism*: injunction to "Enjoy", outcome is our enjoyment is more hindered than ever.
            * Nietzsche, Last Man
* Transparent society means my behavior is regulated in a severe PC way.
* Varoufakis, Another Now, there is nothing left to rebel against (depression)
    * Our Now, repression
    * "Struggle against oppression is endless", infinite task
    * Rebellion, being the absolute purpose, seems to look forward to the elimination of rebellion.
    * Abandoning ideal of self-transparent society which abolishes alienation.
        * Reconciliation with alienation, alienation as condition of our freedom, breathing space to exercise freedom.
        * I am free only insofar as the big Other (social substance) in which I dwell is non-transparent to me and to itself.
    * Iris' choice, subject experiences that her desire is threatened when she is deprived of a space to just say NO.
        * *Surplus-enjoyment*: satisfaction provided just by saying NO to an object.

Overcoming of alienation would deprive the subject of enjoyment:
* Schuster: enjoyment is enjoyment in alienation itself (through symbolic alienation).
    * Alienation in the symbolic order, "*man's desire is the Other's desire*", enjoyment is a return-to-self, appropriation of the alienated conditions as if they were one's own.
    * Enjoyment is autonomization with regard to the big Other: I don't need the Other's love, satisfaction is brought by my own activity.
        * "Through enjoyment, I possess my dispossession, or at least I get off on it."

Irreducible parallax, **desire and enjoyment**:
* Lacan: "desire is a defense against going beyond a limit in jouissance"; with the "never that", desire protects from the suffocating *over-presence* of enjoyment.
* Lacan: "jouissance is also a defense against desire"; against the void of desire; enjoyment enacts a reflexive turn by means of which, while missing the absent Thing, we achieve satisfaction in the very act of repeatedly missing it.
* Same as *desire and drive*:
    * Desire lack, non-satisfaction
        * Metonymic sliding
    * Drive generates satisfaction in circular movement.
        * Elevating the endless circulation into source of satisfaction.
    * Co-dependent, not reaction to one another: parallax, neither are more primordial than the other.
* Third term is the pure gap itself, both terms are the two reactions to this gap.
    * Desire, gap appears as lack
    * Drive, gap appears as excess that derails circulation of life

Antigone,* ne pas ceder sur son desir:*
* Desire is hysteric and metonymic, targets gap beyond/between demands: not giving up means readiness to pass from one object to other.
* Antigone insists on demand
    * *Drive: $ - D*; subject attached to demand.

**Objet a, parallax**:
* Desire, always-eluding surplus
* Drive, central void around which drive circulates
* Schelling: *indivisible remainder*: piece of trash AND purely formal twisted structure of the machine itself.
    * Piece of trash gives body to a contortion in the machine itself.

Is enjoyment separation?
* NO: separation is that in the Other itself
* Desire and enjoyment relate as lack and excess, on the opposite sides of the Moebius track.
    * No higher synthesis, the gap comes first
* *Separation* located in this gap which separates the two versions of objet a: pure form and formless remainder: separates the same object from itself, into its from without stuff and its formless stuff.

## So What is Surplus-Enjoyment?

Brecht, *Dreigroschenoper*: "circumstances aren't so (good)"
* Cynical delivering of bad news, obvious pleasure, surplus-enjoyment.

Valmont, "C'est pas ma faute!"
* Obfuscating one's subjective engagement, to make oneself an impassive victim of circumstances.

Leftist mantra is opposite: things are not inevitably as they are, they could also be done otherwise, another world is possible.

## Enjoying Alienation

Constitutive alienation of enjoyment**, we experience enjoyment as mediated by the big Other: either the Other's enjoyment is inaccessible to us or our rightful enjoyment stolen from us by an Other.
* Trump, Jan 6 Capitol carnival, theft of enjoyment:
    * Carnival as model of progressive protest movements is problematic:
        * Non-centralized organization
        * Form and atmosphere
        * Late-capitalist social reality itself is already carnivalesque.
    * "Carnival" as obscene underside of power
    * *"Our way of life"*, not class-neutral: it is that of the white middle-class who perceive themselves as the true embodiment of "what America is about".
    * Deeper satisfaction in our specific way of life, or, paranoia about the Other's way of life.
    * Leftist fascination and horror; Rightists stealing enjoyment from the Left.

Surplus-enjoyment and surplus-value, short circuit and not parallelism:
* MacGowan: capitalism effectively fits "human nature", incorporates into its functioning the basic paradox of human desire.
    * Capitalism, hedonism and asceticism coincides (orientation towards satisfaction compels us to permanently sacrifice available satisfactions on behalf of satisfactions to come).
* Zupancic: in consumerism, the *hysterical* stance is re-appropriated by a *perverse* libidinal economy: we know well in advance that we will not get what we desired, so we are never really disappointed.
    * *Hysterical drama* of deceit fails to take place.
    * Perversion, knowledge-which-neutralizes-the-hysterical-drama.
    * Hysteria, questioning. Pervert, knowledge.
    * Consumerist is a *cynical pervert* who knows.
* Capitalist's enjoyment and Capital's enjoyment:
    * Capitalist is a pervert, enjoys observing the expanded self-reproduction of Capital.
    * Hegel: absolute Idea enjoys its repeated self-reproduction. Philosopher is just impassive observer of this self-enjoyment of the absolute Idea.
    * Pervert, impersonal enjoyment.
        * Distance from horror, bureaucratic stance, is part of enjoyment.
        * SS officer, bureaucrat of evil, agent of the ethical substance of his nation.

Trump is not old conservatism, he is the caricatural inverted image of postmodern "permissive society" itself, product of its antagonisms and inner limitations.
* Johnston: the return of the repressed sometimes is the most effective repression.
    * Obscenities only strengthen the repression.
    * Brutal obscenity of enjoyment is immanent to the structure
* Zupancic, two-level surplus:
    * 1. Capitalism puts to use the surplus that destabilizes other social formations, it counts on surplus.
    * 2. A surplus that cannot be included in capital's reproduction is produced, Rightist populism is attempt to re-configure this excess.

Two figures of the pervert:
* Valmont; victim is subjectivized, a divided subject unable to assume her enjoyment in her own humiliation.
    * Power and sexuality, being desired gives me power over them.
* SS executioners: enjoyment is externalized not in victims but in the impersonal big Other.
    * Pervert bring out the basic de-centering of enjoyment with regard to subject:
    * Enjoyment is never directly subjectivized.
        * Subjectivation is always a reaction to traumatic intrusion of enjoyment
        * Desire as the name of how enjoyment is subjectivized.

## Martin Luther as a Film Noir Figure

Ruda, *Abolishing Freedom*: freedom as a term of disorientation.

* "Theology" signals de-centering of enjoyment with regard to subject; God is figure of enjoying big Other, which threatens subject's freedom, compels to abolish human freedom.
* If there is no free will, why does it matter to convince us that it is so?
    * Enunciated propositional content contradicted by the process of its enunciation.
* Free will is ultimately an appearance, but this appearance itself has an efficiency of its own.
* *Noirs*, we cannot escape Fate, but we also cannot escape the burden of responsibility into Fate.
    * Negation of negation: first subjective autonomy is negated, then this negation itself is denounced as a subjective stratagem.
* Martin Luther, commandments produce knowledge of the fact that there is no free will.
    * Superegoic dimension: the more we obey the superego commandment the more we feel guilty.
    * *Superego-individualization*; we are a priori guilty, indebted to Mother Nature.
        * Guilt is justified: I follow rituals which allow me to postpone doing something that would really address the causes of ecological crisis.
        * Pleasure in self-probing
        * *"Indebted man"*: I am in debt, therefore I exists as a subject integrated into the social order.
        * Pathological fear of being guilty of Islamophobia; any critique of Islam is denounced as Western Islamophobia.
    * Limit of Christianity: awareness of impotence is the act of freedom, changes everything. It is because of our freedom that the experience of impotence drives us to despair.
        * Christ is not needed for this insight.
    * No common measure that relates God and mankind--- there is no human-divine relationship.
        * Difference between* God for us *and* God in itself*: God is not his Word (or Christ).
        * The gap is in God himself--- the fact that god appears affects god's identity.
            * There is a non-relationship which exists as such, in the figure of Christ.

Eckhart's God replaced by Christ: one cannot be without God in Heaven because God IS Heaven, the only way God can be in Hell is in the figure of Christ.
* God without Christ is the Devil himself; parallax between God and Devil;
    * Devil is God as superego authority, as a Master enacting his caprices.
* Mystical unity of my I and God is the void of eternity.
    * To step out of the realm of creatures one has to descend to the lowest level, Hell (get rid of God himself as supreme creature).
* How can eternity itself descend into the temporal finite existence?
    * Schelling: eternity is the ultimate prison, suffocating closure, the fall into creaturely life introduces Opening into human (and divine) experience.

Buddhism and Christianity:
* Buddhism: personality is the fall of man
* Christianity: personality is the purpose of God.
    * Christianity is revolutionary because of the overlapping between man's isolation from God and God's isolation from himself.

Predestination is not an objective fact but a matter of choice, of our own unconscious choice which precedes temporal existence.
* Freud:** choice of neurosis**, subject chooses her unconscious.
* Kant, transcendental choice.
    * Only the eternal/atemporal choice is actually free.
* "Anatomy is destiny": what we misperceive as a fact of anatomy is symbolic destiny, forced choice underlies the everyday perception of our sexual identity being based on anatomy.
    * Woman is a name for the act of choosing.
    * Act of choice is feminine, man is a chosen identity.
        * Sexual difference: 
            * Becoming vs being; 
            * Man exists, woman is becoming;
            * Man is object, woman is subject.

Malabou: clitoris gives the body an anarchic excess outside binary complementarity of protruding penis and vaginal hole.
* Role of clitoris in symbolic space of woman makes it traumatic, ignored or even circumcised.
* Malabou dismisses Lacan and Freud as phallogocentric:
    * Feminine position as not-all caught in the phallic logic, the something which escapes it is embodied in the clitoris.
    * BUT feminine position implies no exception, while the masculine logic implies an exception.
* With the clitoris, sexual difference itself is integrated/reflected in the feminine body; clitoris is a phallic remainder.
    * What defines feminine sexuality is the distance between the clitoris and vaginal hole; non-phallic clitoral orgasm and phallic-vaginal one).
    * Heterosexual masculine; division is eternal, penis vs vagina
    * Feminine; division is internal, vaginal hole vs clitoris
* "Woman" stands for abyssal freedom while "man" stands for Predestination.

## A Desire Not to Have a Mother

The subject who dares to confront this abyss has to reject mother.
* Rammstein, *Mutter*, motherless child who survives his suicide.
    * Mother is impossible/real, no actual mother.
    * Hero's suicide had to fail because he was never fully alive, only through the failure of his suicide that he comes to be.
        * *Failed non-being*.
* Way out of failed non-being, atemporal decision, choosing one's own not-being.
    * This is only "happiness", not fidelity to Event.

# Finale: Subjective Destitution as a Political Category

Heidegger; Negroes have no history.
* Language as "house of being": not abstract-universal language of science and state administration, but language rooted in a particular way of life, historically specific disclosure of reality.


Two ways of reacting to catastrophe:
* Withdrawing into immediate proximity, forget about global crisis.
* Withdraw into global view of the universe, humans as tiny drop.

## The Two Ends of Philosophy

Object naturalism (ON) and subject naturalism (SN):
* ON: all there IS is the world studied by science.
* SN: science tells us that we are natural creatures, philosophy must give way if its ambitions conflict with this view.
    * Hume
* SN has logical priority: ON relies on validation from a SN perspective.
    * Representational language → performative language, multitude of language games.
    * Objective scientific approach is always rooted in symbolic practices--- SN transcendentalizes naturalism; our symbolic practice is a priori, has to be here if we are to analyze objective reality.

Ontic, vs transcendental, is concerned with reality itself, its emergence and deployment.
* Thales, water, minimum of idealism at work--- water as "ideal" entity, short-circuit where one particular element stands for all.
* Modern reproach; philosophy proposes a universalization without proper empirical study and justification.
    * Neo-Kantian transcendental philosophy: our self-perception as free and responsible agents is a necessary illusion, also the transcendental a priori of every scientific knowledge.
        * Habermas, "objective mind"; intersubjective domain of rational validity
            * Big Other
* Heidegger: "ontological difference", reality vs horizon within which reality appears.
    * "Agnostic phenomenalist"; his true problem is the status of the ontic outside a horizon of Being.

Double end of philosophy:
* "Wired brain", naturalization of human thought
* Transcendental historicism, naive questions about reality is accepted as "naive".
* Parallax:
    * At naive level, it is clear that humans evolved out of a vast field of reality
    * The circle including ourselves in reality cannot be fully closed since every explanation already relies on a certain horizon of meaning.
        * Heidegger, epochal change of what is "true" or "false"

Zero-level of reality and its transcendental horizon is not in their synthesis but in the rupture between the two.

* What if the transcendental dimension is the "return of the repressed" of our notion of reality?

## Man as a Katastrophe

The immanent insufficiency of each end of philosophy (positive science and transcendental approach) opens up the space for the other.

Heidegger; in the "derangement" of man's position among beings, ontological madness is a necessary intermediate step (vanishing mediator) between pre-human nature and symbolic universe; "man in his very essence is katastrophe, the only catastrophe in the midst of beings."
* Heidegger's "Substance is Subject": "no Being without Being-There as the place of its disclosure".
    * Singular entity, derangement: particular entity is the exclusive site at which all entities appear, acquire their Being.
    * *Dasein* is embodied.
* Catastrophe is not only man but already nature itself, and in man as the being-of-speech this catastrophe that grounds reality in itself only comes to word.

Jameson; predestination indicates retroactive causality which characterizes a properly dialectical historical process.

The only contact we have with the Real "independent of us" is our very separation from it (quantum physics and relativity theory, don't correspond in our direct experience of reality).
* Christianity, Christ's separation is the contact with the Real: God is the retroactive effect of its own fall.
* The gap as the point of unity is Hegel's dialectic, thought which cannot be reduced to science.
* Retroactivity; 
    * Marx, anatomy of the ape plagiarizes by anticipation the anatomy of man.
    * The effect of teleology is retroactive; once capitalism is here, it provides a universal key for all other formations.
    * Sexuality:
        * There is no sexual relationship already among apes, but it is "in itself", simple fact.
        * Humans, the failure is registered as such, for itself".

Dialectical materialism, reflexivity inscribed in the universe: the external difference between content and form is inscribed in content itself.
* Basic model of dialectical reversal is not big struggle against opposite, but a small displacement within the same which changes everything.
* Hegel's resource is the experience of the irreducible gap that precedes a dynamized transcendental dimension and the "objective" dialectical process of reality itself.
* *Naturalist materialism*: pre-Platonic materialists, object-oriented-ontology
* *Idealism*: predominance of the transcendental approach
* *Dialectical materialism*: materialist "theology", beyond transcendental or naively reality.
    * "Hegel is a dialectical materialist" = "the Spirit is a bone": taken directly, it is nonsense, there is infinite gap between Hegel and dialectical materialism.
        * Hegel's thought is the thought of this gap.

## "We Must Live Till We Die"

Space of the living-dead, beyond being-towards-death, is where subject can enact subjective destitution, escape from vicious cycle of surplus-enjoyment.
* Rammstein, *Dalai Lama*: death-drive, we have to LIVE till we die, endless dragging of life, compulsion to repeat.
    * Ethical dimension; we HAVE to live; life is not organic continuation; humans decide, active obligation--- we can lose this will.
    * Although we cannot escape death, even accepting death is not the solution; the ultimate negation fails, we still have to live till we die.

Pandemic was opposite of Lenin's "there are weeks when decades happen".
* Castration, with no disruption enough of digital commodity capitalism to serve as any kind of revolution.
* To account for what did effectively happen; it is a desperate reaction to threat--- threat of the only adequate way of confronting the pandemic (universal global healthcare, universal basic income, etc.).
* OPPOSITE OF CASTRATION: castration is liberating loss which opens the space for creative distance, absence of castration means psychotic suffocation in which the symbolic falls into the real.
    * Over-proximity of others became mortal threat, the opening of social space collapsed.
* *State of exception*:
    * Pandemic, self-defensive measure and immune reaction by the political body.
        * Invading life form which invaded the political body, not state authority.
* To fight against the pandemic, we should live with utmost intensity; pandemic doctors, *they lived till they died*.
    * Subjective destitution

## From Being-Towards-Death to Undeadness

Shostakovich, Fifth Symphony:
* "Delvig", cancels the premise that "death is terrifying. There is nothing beyond it." Beyond death is poetry which makes death a noble event.
* Delirious interaction, beyond death, is opened by subjective destitution.

## Revolutionary Self-Destitution...

