202210161609

Status: 
Tags: 

What Freud introduces as "death drive" (*Todestrieb*) is not what Zupancic and other Lacanians mean by it.
* [[Freud]]: "instinct" to regain the supposed original homeostatic, tensionless state.
* [[Zizek]]: death drive is the most radical tendency to maintain a state of tension, to avoid final "relaxation" in obtaining a state of full homeostasis. Death drive is the insistence of an organism on endlessly repeating the state of tension.
* There is a logic from the first to the second on the ground of [[sex]]uality:
	* The middle of "Beyond the Pleasure Principle":
		* Death drive as primary (first instinct is that of returning to inanimate matter, all life aims for death)
		* Life instincts (conservative instincts) are forces that fortify the detours from this fundamental drive.
		    * Secondary formations in respect to life's primary drive, the death drive.
		* Death drive names a kind of fundamental or ontological fatigue of life as such, it is the steady undercurrent of life.
		* Life is accidental, there is no will anywhere that wants to live: what we see as "vital forces" are instincts constituted in the process of reiteration of the accident called life.
		* There is no struggle of two wills called life forces and death forces, life is a circuitous route to death, and conservative instincts are the pavement of this route, they are indistinguishable from it.
		* Instincts of self-preservation do not change life's fundamental goal, they simply introduce a *temporality* into it. Mode of this temporality is *repetition*.
		* Life is not the other of death, it is something that happens to the inanimate. It is interruption, a gap appearing in the inanimate.
		    * Life gives a **singular, separate form to an inherent gap** on account of which the inanimate does not simply coincide with itself.
		    * Not only that the inanimate universe is indifferent to life (materialist reproach to correlationist view of reality), we are mere perversions, strange pleasures, of the inanimate itself.
		        * Life is a nightmare of the inanimate.
		        * Death drive is an "objective affect" of life
	* The beginning of "Beyond the Pleasure Principle": (Original conception of) Death drive is not what goes on "beyond the pleasure principle".
		* *Pleasure principle* refers to seeking relief from tension, to the lowering of tension in an attempt to reach a homeostatic state.
		    * It is a mental equivalent of what Freud later calls the fundamental tendency of all life to return to the inanimate. 
		    * death drive = pleasure principle
		* *"Reality principle"* is like the detour of life instincts.
		* Sexual drives are in life more than life.
		* Dualistic view, opposition between Eros and Thanatos.
			* *Todestriebe* is fatigue as life's fundamental and objective affect
			* Sexual drives split with this logic, they are detours that make an actual difference, produce something "new", establish potential immortality (of the species).
			* ==Dualism of the drives is actually the other side of conceiving libido as a "neutral" desexualized substance (Jung).==
	- The end of "Beyond the Pleasure Principle": Monism of antagonism, contradiction, or split: there are only sexual drives (all drives are sexual).
		* Only sexual drives *drive* us in any meaningful sense of the word (to elsewhere than a return to an earlier homeostatic stage).
		* Vs. Fatigue, "magnetism of the inanimate".
		* With sexual drives, death is inherent to life, conditioning its perpetuation.
		    * Death of the individual is fundamental to sex (the survival of the species means that each individual is transitory and dies).

Drive is the impossible joint articulation of being and meaning in their heterogeneity.[^1]
- The being of the drive is lack-of-being.
- Drive is the being of the lack/void.

Embodies inner split of all satisfaction (possibility of supplemental satisfaction), [^2]
	* de-centering the subject and the Other:
		* Subject finds satisfaction through the detour of the Other.
			* Detour is irreducible (i.e. transference is inevitable illusion)

[[Lacan]]: drive finds its satisfaction without attaining its aim.[^3]
* Drive is not element but elementary form of the split that precedes the elements split in it.
* Object of drive is the gap itself as object.



Split entails the division between the mental and the physical and their possible articulation.
* E.g. [[Culture]], 
	* drive is short-circuit between them
	* Drive is intersection which is generative of both sides that overlap it.
		* Humans are many points where the difference between biology and the symbolic and themselves as defined by this difference are generated, the relationship between the who dimensions is being constantly negotiated (posited, repeated, solidified, defined, and redefined).
		* No ‘pure life’ or ‘pure symbolic’, paradoxical joint:
			* Autonomous field of the symbolic is produced at the periphery of movement generated by the intersection and retroactively affects its own point of generation.
	* Analysis stumbles against the subject of the drive that binds the self and the otherness in their very split.

Topology of the drive has two ways to understand:
* Standard reading: with humans the deviation from organic need is original, and it is this deviation as original that constitutes the human Difference, Exception.
* Radical reading: as a being of the drive, man is the point where nature's own inherent impossibility gets articulated as such.
    * "Human difference" is what testifies to the fact that its Other (the Animal) does not exist.
---
# References

[^1]: [[Why Psychoanalysis#A concept of an ontological impasse]]
[^2]: [[Why Psychoanalysis#The object of freedom]]
[^3]: [[Why Psychoanalysis#Some (un)timely observations]]