202210161609

Status: 
Tags: 

Drive is the impossible joint articulation of being and meaning in their heterogeneity.[^1]
- The being of the drive is lack-of-being.
- Drive is the being of the lack/void.

Embodies inner split of all satisfaction (possibility of supplemental satisfaction), [^2]
	* de-centering the subject and the Other:
		* Subject finds satisfaction through the detour of the Other.
			* Detour is irreducible (i.e. transference is inevitable illusion)

[[Lacan]]: drive finds its satisfaction without attaining its aim.[^3]
* Drive is not element but elementary form of the split that precedes the elements split in it.
* Object of drive is the gap itself as object.

Split entails the division between the mental and the physical and their possible articulation.
* E.g. [[Culture]], 
	* drive is short-circuit between them
	* Drive is intersection which is generative of both sides that overlap it.
		* Humans are many points where the difference between biology and the symbolic and themselves as defined by this difference are generated, the relationship between the who dimensions is being constantly negotiated (posited, repeated, solidified, defined, and redefined).
		* No ‘pure life’ or ‘pure symbolic’, paradoxical joint:
			* Autonomous field of the symbolic is produced at the periphery of movement generated by the intersection and retroactively affects its own point of generation.
	* Analysis stumbles against the subject of the drive that binds the self and the otherness in their very split.

Topology of the drive has two ways to understand:
* Standard reading: with humans the deviation from organic need is original, and it is this deviation as original that constitutes the human Difference, Exception.
* Radical reading: as a being of the drive, man is the point where nature's own inherent impossibility gets articulated as such.
    * "Human difference" is what testifies to the fact that its Other (the Animal) does not exist.
---
# References

[^1]: [[Why Psychoanalysis#A concept of an ontological impasse]]
[^2]: [[Why Psychoanalysis#The object of freedom]]
[^3]: [[Why Psychoanalysis#Some (un)timely observations]]